Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you very much, everyone's participation and thank you
again. Now again, we are going to reflect the teaching of the gracious teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni.
Therefore, again, we reactivate our motivation, and that is the foundation of every good activity.
Generally, motivation is really everything. Everything that we do in the samsara or in
the Rana, all start with motivation. Therefore, correct motivation is so important, and keep
that good motivation all the time. That's the way we progress our practice in meditation,
and that's the way we get that beautiful motivation. Well, bring our full bloom or
full fruit, full actualizing result, accomplishment. Therefore, we should always start with good
motivation, and this motivation is nothing. It's something different, extraordinary, or something
we have to do special. No, just activate our good heart, good qualities of the mind, which is
always
in the teaching, joy and appreciation. Joy and appreciation, thankful, grateful. To all the
circumstances in the college and opportunity we have, really thankful, grateful, but at the same
time have courage and commitment that I'm going to use this all beautiful opportunity to make even
something more beautiful, more good things for myself, as well as all other beings. That's how
we begin our practice of Dharma. That really is so important, and we keep that motivation as much
as
we can all the time, day and the night and the morning and the evening all the time. Then it's
good. Then together with that, in bodhijata, and that we're going to discuss today also more,
bodhijata, love and kindness compared to thought of all living beings. That means all beings,
regardless of what situation, circumstance, or what maybe they are. But in Buddhism,
called the beings of six realms, so it's not just only human beings. All the beings have that love,
kindness, compared to thought. From the core of our heart, really we say that is the essence and
foundation, very foundation of the Buddha teachings. With that, then in purity understand,
purity understand, or purity realizations. Everything is in purity status, generally.
We don't see right now, due to our duality and grasping, it kind of blocks that. Otherwise,
really reality, everything is beautiful. Subject is beautiful, object is beautiful,
everything is enlightened, the Muslim state is beautiful. There's no names of suffering,
the difficulty challenging impures that exist there at all. But that because due to mishandled by
our
own duality mind, and then it's all kind of happened, but reality is beautiful. Now we're
going back to that purity state, therefore, reactivated that right now is also so important
according to the teaching. With those beautiful motivation, and now we go to the teaching itself,
and that is we've been doing, we're going to go in this teaching, on this teaching for a few days,
and now we're going to, we're going to, if you have this electrical piece, and whatever
poem you have, it's according this, page 13. Page 13, the root of dharma is bodhicada,
we're going to start there. We discuss already all the different aspects of these teachings
that already, so we won't, I won't repeat that again today, and go to the bodhicada. And bodhicada
also I said, not just I said, according to teaching, first it is rafuddhi is so important.
We discuss that, making close connection to the Buddha dharma sangha with the confidence,
with the appreciation, with the devotion, those are known as rafuddhi, making close connection,
contact, contact, that is rafuddhi. Once we develop this bodhicada, or sorry rafuddhi, then
Mahayana teaching, then we develop the bodhicada. Again, I'm sure many of you know already this,
but in Buddhism, there is two schools. One is known as the best basic Buddhist school,
and which are often named also sometimes Hinayanas, but many times they're using now these days,
basic Buddhist school. And the second is Mahayana, sutta Mahayana teaching, teachings
on bodhisattva yanas, maybe we just use bodhisattva yanas. So there's three schools,
basic Buddhist school means what? Bodhisattva yana is the best on the basic Buddhist,
schools, or which is often many times named as Hinayana. So means bodhisattva yana is the best
on the basic fundamental Buddhist school, which Buddha taught at age 35 for a long time.
According to basic Buddhist school, Buddha gave all their teachings until he reached enlightenment,
or sorry, until he entered Mahaparinarana, Buddha gave that teaching. So that is a basic Buddhist
school known as commonly many times Hinayana schools, or Shravaka yana schools, those are that.
And now today we're going to discuss here Mahayana, ombodhisattva yana teaching.
Mahayana means what? Of course, most of you know that. In Sanskrit world,
Maha means great, yana means weakle. So great weakle, great weakle is not externally kind of weakle
that lived and carried way, but this weakle is our intention, intention, our thought,
our intention. What that intention I will discuss the other day to simply say is good heart,
the big good heart, not just a good heart, big good heart, heart, every make that big little
mode, another terminology, then compassion, not just a compassion, but big compassion,
the gigantic compassion. Really that is the big compassion, big loving kindness, big joy, joy,
and big balance in equanimity and openness mind, open heart, not tight. That big, that's called
great. That is that if we have that, that will a limited ourself like weaker, that will lift up us.
This time we are grounded with a small, small mind on the samsara, small, even we have love,
we have compassion, we have joy, we have the equanimity, all those balance is small.
It's really restricted, small love, small compassion, small joy, kind of fragile love,
fragile compassion, fragile joy, and fragile equanimity or balance. Mahayana means big vehicle,
the big, big heart. That is really Mahayana. And we have that, that's really weaker like motorcar
or like aeroplane. It will lift up from samsara to the enlightenment state. Even transcendental,
all our perception, the conceptions, our ideas become completely big, gigantic, not limited,
restricted, and tight, and kind of bouncing all the time, that clacking all the time. No,
open, relax. That is Mahayana. How that started? With the bodhicap, bodhicap, that is what,
therefore, here, great master, his Holiness, Chabjya Dhanuram, he said, "The root of dharma
is bodhicata." Root of dharma, every achievement, every spiritual, good practice, is really best
upon this bodhicata or this simple way I've translated, the good heart and compassion.
Bodhicata is a Sanskrit word, of course, you know, it has two meanings.
Compassion and wisdom combined together. Compassion. This time, as I said, compassion is a big
compassion. Compassion, that combined with the wisdom, inseparable. So wisdom and compassion,
united together, that our beautiful qualities, your beautiful qualities of heart, united together
with the big compassion, big wisdom, are joined together and projecting to all living beings,
to like, every living being, I like to be free from sufferings. I like to make everyone happy,
joy, peaceful. I like to bring every living being to the peaceful status, happiness status,
forever and ever. That attitude is compassion. How in order to do that, what we can do? Even
we have that motivation, we cannot do immediately to bring that. For that reason, we're going to
project our wisdom mind to the enlightenment, to become the Buddha or to get practices. So we will
become more stronger, more stable. Our love and compassion and joy and equanimity become wider
and wider and stronger and stronger, bigger and bigger, and then boneless status. That's what you
heard. Boneless love, boneless compassion, boneless joy, and boneless equanimity. Boneless.
That boneless, boneless and obtainent attitude is the poor boneless. Poor boneless are best upon
the bodhicitta, best upon compassion, best upon the wisdom, best upon the concerning, caring
thought
for all living beings, and best upon also the wisdom that perfectly enlightens natures.
Those are what are known as the essence of bodhicitta. So with this now understanding,
bodhicitta can be like what is the nature of bodhicitta and what is the duration of the bodhicitta,
and what kind of bodhicittas. Those are teaching mentioned, so I will kind of highlight those,
two of those, then I'll go a little bit each of those. Of course, many of you already know that.
First, already I explained the nature of the bodhicitta is the union of compassion and wisdom.
Compassion is projecting to all living beings, as I said. And what this means, compassion is
thinking of all these living beings having so many difficulties, so many troubles and challenges,
even their gain heart, which is joy, peace, happiness, but reality really always bouncing
with the challenges and difficult troubles, not achieving what they like to be achieved,
their desire is not really fulfilling all the time, but therefore feels great compassion.
Compassion for all these beings who are struggling so many levels, really feels that I like to help
all of them, like to preach from their sufferings, not just the sufferings or the cause of their
challenges, the cause of difficulty, troubles, sincerely from thinking that is known as
but their compassion is projecting to the all living beings. In order to make that
fulfillment that which comes true, then we have to equip ourselves. For that reason, we practice
and meditate to purify our obscuration, our negativities, so that we can help with all the
beings freely, easily, openly and pervasively, and without any boundaries and restrictions. For
that
reason, then practice, which is obtained in the teaching said, wisdom is projecting to the
enlightenment, compassion is projecting to the all the living beings, united together with the
compassion is known as the body. So those are the nature of the body. Then the body can be divided
into two groups. Those are, of course, many of you know that, related to the body and the absolute
truth of the body. There is a true body, relative to the body and absolute true body. Now, first
we talk absolute, sorry, relative to body together. Relative to body together has two divisions,
sub-divisions, relative to the body together has two sub-divisions. Those are known as wishing
body together and actualizing body together. And that is, for example, when we pray, when we do
the aspiration prayers, or end of our practices, we do those preface the body together, those who
don't have, may they have the body together, may they have the body together. Those who don't have
the body together, may they have the body together, and those who have body together, may they
always
increase, never demolish, demolishing that. Someday we have that prayer. That is roughly here,
how it is. The preface of the body together, in those without it, may it be generated. In those
who have it, may it be never demolished, but always continually increasing. That is what the prayer
of
the body together is. Post-preface of the body together is the nature of the body together.
That's what I said already. What is the nature of the body together is the union of compassion
and wisdom that is the preface of the body together. It is precious. Why is it called precious?
Because
it is really like wish-fulfilling duels. It performs all our wishes, and we have this body
together. It performs all the wishes. It removes our obscurations, negativities. It performs our
all the wishes of the good thoughts, good hearts. God, and what is the great Master Shanti Deva
said,
is the wish-fulfilling trees. Body together is the wish-fulfilling trees. When you have the truly
body together in our heart, then everything will become so beautiful. Let everyone become your
friends. Everyone will protect us, help and support us. The body together will demolish our
obscurations. It increases our marital activities. From those people who have the body together,
their name will be changed forever. What is their name? Bodhisattvas, male and female. From that
onward, they are the support and help to all the business. They're traveling from light to light.
They're never going to travel from dark to dark in the dark. They become brighter and brighter,
happy and happy. That's what really Bodhisattvas is. Therefore, it is a precious body,
body together. Those who don't have this may generate it. How to generate this? Generate that
with knowing the call and meaning of the body together, then we generate the body together.
That is wishing-body together. We generate the first wishing-body together. Wishing-body
together is, again, the already I mentioned, that poor, boneless is wishing-body together,
love, compassion, joy and equanimity are the essence of wishing-body together. As I said earlier,
there are two kinds of loves. Generally, love and then bodhisatta loves. Generally, compassion
and bodhisatta compassion. Generally, joy and bodhisatta joy. Generally,
equanimity and bodhisatta generosity. Generally, love, compassion, joy and equanimity, we all have
that.
Every living being has some degree, which is good. It's a good heart. It is
very chory. It's virtuous. It's good, but that is not called bodhisatta. Love and compassion and
joy and equanimity. Why? Bodhisatta love and compassion has no boundaries, no limitations,
no restrictions. So therefore, what is named in practice time means poor, boneless.
Because that is something, bodhisatta love is more excessive than the general love,
general compassion. It's more expensive, as I said earlier, too. It's really a very
powerful space. Boneless love to boneless beings. Boneless beings. That means what? The number of
sentient beings has no numbers. There are no numbers for the living beings in Buddhism.
As what great master, great teacher, Buddha said in teaching, as far as space goes, sky goes,
that far there are living beings. And as long as there are living beings, that much everyone has
emotion and karma. As long as they have emotion and karma, that much they all have
difficulty and challenges. So therefore, there's boneless living beings. Therefore,
our love or the bodhisatta love is boneless for all living beings, for every being,
without any restrictions. So boneless love for the projection to the boneless living beings,
and therefore, in the teaching said, it has boneless marriages. The merit of the more can
be not measured. It is really so powerful, so special, that in a means of the love,
you're spreading out without any boundaries. So that means indirectly, we're knocking down the
ego clings, self-important attitude is a little bit kind of slowing something. This ego clinging,
self-important, is the fundamental troublemakers in the samsara according to Buddhism. It's really
troublemaker all the time. It may trouble from the biggest time, now until now. It acts in our
sight,
but reality really is bouncing us all the time, the ego and self-important attitude.
That's why self-important ego is making all the troubles. All the troubles, for example,
in individually troubles or personally trouble is making, just personally trouble, is making
trouble to the within the families, is making trouble with within the friends, is making trouble
within the our neighbors and communities in the country and then larger scales according their
capabilities. This is the ego clinging and self-important and surrounded by all the different
emotions. One happens, act there are the kind of defensive of the support of us, but reality is
bouncing us to the more trouble, more difficulty, more challenge, more disappointment, and more
kind
of crushing us, our joy and peace, hope and vision and goal in the dreams. Really is so much.
So therefore, this thinking of this boneless love, it is crumbling that is in the behind the scene,
the self-important attitude, ego cleanliness too. Therefore, it is so powerful. Then same way,
compassion. Compassion, boneless compassion for all the beings and boneless joy,
boneless joy, appreciation, thankful, happy. Anybody was having good kind of result,
achievement, but celebrating that and ignite that. Our heart is singing with fulfillment
and good lives of other ones, really happy and joy and peace. And we have that attitude.
According to Buddhism, it is so much merit. It is completely, that attitude of joy is free from the
jealousness, heady thought, and ego clinging, or it's demolishing the ego clinging some degree,
and opening our heart and mind. It therefore is increasing, in the teaching said, increasing
meritures. It purifies our obscurations, obstacles, habit patterns. So that is known as a tune.
Then, equanimity is balance. Balance, many other ways. That means we are equal.
All living beings are equal. We are all equal with everyone.
Which level? Which level? In what, what level we are equal? Because feeling level, we are equal.
Our desire level equal. What we have the feeling, they have similar that feeling. That means what?
We like to be happy, they like to be happy. So that level same. And we like to be, we don't like
to be suffered. They don't like to be suffered. That level same. There's no difference. And we
like to be happy and joy, peace. We like to perform our wishes. That others like the same thing.
They
like to perform their wishes. They like to perform their dreams. Dreams. There's no difference.
Everything. And then also structural level. The old human beings, the animals at this world,
share the same thing. Really structural level, biological level. Live five organs and senses
and all those are same. And we all rely on this earth. We breathe in the same air. We drink the
same water. We bath in the same sun, warmness of suns and the moon, the stars and the air.
Same. No difference. Every level really same. And therefore, no one is really want sadness and
suffering the difficulty. But yet is struggling with everyone some degree. Even we are known as,
our human beings are known as upper realms, higher realms, but still we have so many challenges and
difficulties. And one after another. Therefore, then this body jetta is the great medicine to heal
all those troubles, difficulty challenges, and bring their performance. So that's the poor,
boneless thoughts. With this thought, those are the brain. Then I think many of you already know.
Now you develop generally in the boat. Now with this poor boneless, we develop this actualizing
body jetta. Actualizing body jetta, when we have the knowledge and understanding of this,
then we receive the blessings and the lineage blessings of both each other. Both each other,
those are known as taking the vows. Vows of body jetta. Then we're going to activate body jetta.
That activating body jetta is that with thinking of all living beings. Again, the same thing now.
Same that poor, boneless attitude in the heart and the mind. With that, we're going to help to all
beings, everyone, and how to start with that. That here, here, great Master, his son, Dunyun,
will sit here. So that is activating body jetta according to this one. Then what is this?
In those, without it, may it generate it. So that means that our waking body jetta is developed,
and therefore, then you take the vows or take the lineage blessings, and then, now what are you
going to do? Those who have it, may it never be demolished or damaged. That means how we're going
to maintain that, and then how to progress is here. His only Dunyun would say it. Benefiting others
is the activity of the conqueror's offsprings, or conqueror's son and daughters, a symbol which
oscillates. That's it. Conqueror's son and daughters. So the activity of the benefiting,
that is then keeping the body jetta actively. How we keep that actively body jetta and progress
state. That is six paramatas. Six paramatas. And the six paramatas is then, of course, I think many
of you already know, the generous paramata, and the morality paramata, and the patient paramata,
and the joyful effort to the virtuous paramata, and then concentration paramata, and
the wisdom, or the pandya paramata. Those are the six paramatas, I think.
I say six, yeah, six paramatas. Those are the six paramata practices, and that is all
better. Generous paramata is best upon poor boneless, and the morality paramata is best
upon the poor boneless, and the patient paramata is best upon the poor boneless.
Joyful effort for the virtuous paramata is best upon poor boneless,
and then the concentration as well as the pandya paramata, all best upon the
six paramatas, all best upon the poor boneless. So now I said earlier to you,
body jetta can be, not can be, has two divisions. The relative true body jetta and absolute true
the body jetta. Relative true body jetta has two subdivisions, is reaching body jetta, actualizing
body jetta. That is relative body jetta. Whatever, then absolute body jetta. Absolute true body j
etta
is understanding the meaning and the nature of the relative true body jetta. So that means what?
The nature of the, for example, nature of love is what? Absolute level nature of loving-kindness,
bounded love, is emptiness. And boneless compassion, nature of the boneless compassion
is emptiness. And nature of the joy, boneless joy, is emptiness.
And nature of the equanimity, boneless, is emptiness. And I'm sure you understand that.
What that means? We're talking about the love is so special. It's true.
Boneless love is so special, so beautiful, so powerful. It removes all obstacles,
obscurations, all that. But where is that love? Where is that boneless love?
We cannot bring or touch. See, it's a pervasive quality with the nature of the mind.
It's the nature of the mind, pervasive quality. Pervasive, it shines from the nature of the mind.
It is residing in the nature of the mind. It again comes from the nature of the mind.
Therefore, the nature of the mind has no boundaries, no deep.
It's boneless. Therefore, we can bring boneless love without exhorting our love.
As much as we're exhorting or punishing, or can't relate, lost the love. If we bring more loving-
kindness,
we're going to decrease our love. No. Actually, it's increasing. It's increasing,
more powerful, because we discover from the infinite treasure of the mind.
Love, that is bodhicata, so the absolute bodhi. The nature of the relative bodhicata
is the absolute true bodhicata. This time, we can't intellectually understand that
emptiness, meaning of the emptiness. But with this emptiness, because with this understanding,
practice and meditate, then when we will see the nature of the absolute truth,
exactly as our bodhicata, absolute true bodhicata, when, according to Buddhism,
is the post-Bhoomi. The seeing part, you see the exactly absolute bodhicata.
This absolute bodhicata is actually same as Dzogchen teaching. Dzogchen teaching is an absolute
bodhicata. Therefore, many times, Dzogchen teachings are named bodhicata teachings,
because it's an absolute bodhicata. It's the essence of the teaching, where this relative
bodhicata arises from that absolute true bodhicata. But the absolute true bodhicata is, in a way,
external, is the outreaching. We can categorize, we can explain, we can discuss, we can't do those
things. The absolute true bodhicata is beyond the world, beyond the levels. And that's what
great teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, said in the teaching, "Unborn, unseasoned." Nature is like sky.
If we use this kind of like, commonly what we see, kind of we can adjust it in this world,
can tell all that sky. Absolute bodhicata is like sky. But the sky was the sky.
This blue color, we see, according to Buddhism, is not the sky. That is the color.
This is not the sky. This is sky. This space, this openness is sky. This has no boundaries.
Also, when we see, when we say, we say, "Oh, I saw sky." But reality, what we saw, what we see now,
for example, sky, we can say maybe this openness, this spaciousness. Otherwise, there's nothing we
can really make the descriptions. That is absolute bodhicata. Absolute bodhicata is, now we know a
little bit intellectually, intellectually, theoretically we understand them, but reality,
that actually this absolute bodhicata will shine to our mind and realize this mind when we reach
the first booming in the teaching set, or the same path. That time, you see, exactly as it is,
without as intellectual, without any presumptions, without any tiru. Tiru, you see.
See that? That is absolute bodhicata. In order to bridge that realization, then we do this
external, performant activity of the six paramatas. Six paramata practice is absolutely best upon
poor, boneless love, joy, compassion, joy, and equanimities. With that, then each nature,
six paramata, nature of the generous paramata is sharing, is giving, giving to the others
without grasping, without clinging. Whatever you give, we give with joy, with appreciation,
with good heart, with the bodhicata, poor, boneless thoughts. That is the generosity practices.
Whether it is small, whether it is big, whatever it is, with good heart. That is called virtues.
And what a great teacher, a Buddha, Shakyamuni, said in teaching,
generous practice with open heart without any expectations, and give that to the others.
That is generosity. Then generous practice, generosity has many divisions. Of course,
you know, maybe we won't go those things, but generosity. And really those are
material generosity practices and protection generosity practices and words of wisdom
generosity practices. Those are the three generosity practices, which it says also, many others,
but
reality generosity is open heart, sharing, and giving to the others with the compassion,
with the bond, poor boneless thought, with the love. That generosity is so powerful,
so special in the teachings. And you can also dedicate that merit for all the living beings,
really the brain, by this generosity. What in the teaching said, by this generosity,
may I liberate all the living beings who are not ever liberated by the precious Buddhas,
prayers by this generosity. The teaching says that. That is praise. You can really doing this,
something we're performing, very beautiful activities. And then second is the moralities,
parameters. And morality is the essence and nature of the morality is like to be pure at
purity thought or attitude is the moralities. Like to be pure, keep pure, pure of the body,
pure of the speech, pure of the mind, that attitude, or like to be a clear way, clear way,
negative videos. I like clear with the body negative videos, speaking negative videos,
mental negative videos. I like to clear ways. Can having that attitude, I don't like to be
associated with the negative video and keep that with my body, my speech, my mind. Having that
thought is the pure, the essence of morality, essence of morality. With that, then following
the old instructions of the Buddha teachings, there's many instructions for the instructions
of morality for the lay practitioners as well as ordained practitioners, many levels. Those are all
known as morality practices. Morality practice or morality parameters. The next one is the patience
.
Patience is what? Nature of the patience is commitment to upkeeping the body.
That is that. So that means your commitment and your our courage.
Courageous. Or sometimes in the teaching, it says never mind attitudes.
Having the attitude of never mind. I'm going to maintain that. But that means, never mind means
if someone, the patient, when we practice, you know, lose patience, when we are in what's called
encountering, in contrary with external activities or the disturbance activities, that time we lose
our patience. So for that reason, I would say never mind. Have the attitude of never mind.
So that means when I say never mind, what that indicating in the deep immediately, that shows
the proof or that proves that individual is courage and commitment is so strong.
That is not going to disturb their identity of the body together. Keeping up courage and commitment
.
Commitment. Never mind. Like that. That's really the essence of the patience.
And then patience to the external challenges. Patience to the inner emotionals. Inner emotionals.
And patience to the practice dharmas. Practice dharmas. Those are all in the teaching. So always
have the strong confidence, courage and commitment. Upkeeping the practices. Practice. So that is
patient practices. Brilliant. And next one is the port paramattam, which is joyful effort
for the virtues I translated. Why? Before I used to translate it, joyful effort.
Effort. But now I added it to myself, self-virtues. So many times, because of what the
greater master, Shanti Deva said in his teaching, what is joyful effort? Joyful effort is the one
who has joy to the virtues. That's what he said. Joy to the virtues. So that means that also when
you say the joy to the virtues, that is joyful effort in this bodhicata. But if you have the joy
to do some different activities, that is not the joyful effort of the paramattam or bodhicata
paramattam, because maybe you're inspired doing something, something that maybe not really
lined up with bodhicata. You can't regular activate your joy or your, I'm keen, I'm hobby,
I'm doing this and that things. People do so many different things because they are joy.
They can't be happy with doing that. Just feel happy with that, don't you think? Maybe that
is not lined up with us helping to the others. Maybe, or somebody even maybe hurting some others.
For order to cut that and then make the purely as it is so joyful effort to the virtues.
As great master Shanti Deva said, the effort, joyful effort is, the nature of joyful effort is
joyful to the virtues. So joyful effort is then that is joyful effort for all the practices,
meditations, really just that. And also that means we have joyful effort, we are not under the
power
of the laziness. It's directly opposite of the laziness. Laziness, or there's also laziness,
it's not just a kind of casual laziness, just to kind of like become as a piece of logs,
or a G kind of log. That is not just only. There is also laziness in Buddhism. According to
teaching,
laziness of something more kind of like, it's attracted with doing some kind of unwholesome
or unnecessary wasted times. Wasted times. Sometimes I saw in one poem on the wall, his poem,
and eating the popcorn and sitting on the sofa as a refrigerator and watching the televisions.
So sitting on the sofa, watching the television, eating the, sitting on the sofa as a refrigerator,
eating the popcorn, watching the television. I thought this is also, also I thought this,
according to Buddhism, it's maybe later laziness. Laziness, you just don't like to do anything,
just like, that's it. Really, drinking those popcorn or whatever, which is good, is wonderful,
really.
Very good. But however, however it is, I mean, it's just really has nothing,
anything, just kind of like that. Then time is according to Buddhism, I mean, it's true,
not just Buddhism. We look carefully, time is so precious. And if time is really on the our side,
when everything is good and our capable to do something good, is really good to do. I'm not
kidding your time. Therefore, joy and appreciation. When every time everything is on our side,
how fortunate, how grateful. That is called golden opportunities. Golden opportunities are not just
coming gold. Golden opportunities, when we have the everything is on our side and we have the
freedom and the capability to activate it. During that action, action, fulfilling that, that is the
golden opportunity you're really fulfilling. It's so wonderful, so special, and which is also in
the
Buddhism called, we're making the meaning for our own spiritual lives, making life something
spiritual.
We are really developing, building something special to our heart and mind,
not external maybe, but from to the heart and mind. According to teaching, teaching, whatever
we're able to progress, develop with mind, that will go with us when we leave this world.
Whatever we do something externally, even those great monument that has merit, that will go with
us, but otherwise everything stays out. There's no one that can take, but what things we develop
with our heart and mind, according to teaching, that will come with us. So then that means we're
really also making something special trail, trail for our future destinations beyond what we see
now.
Really, all will be good. So that means then everything becomes more comfortable, nice,
more uplifting. We leave this world with joy and peace, happiness, and we're kind of thankful,
and that will stretch all the way according to Buddhism to the next lives. That all is
usually the time right way, and making it meaningful of these our spiritual lives.
Life is just a short time, but our mind is, according to teaching, it's not going to end,
it's not going to stop, it will be continued. So well, everything is in our sight, and use the time
,
and make that something meaningful. It's joyful effort, joyful efforts.
With that, and then next one is the next paramata, is the Deon paramata or concentrations.
The essence and nature of the concentration is not distracted, not distracted. That is essence,
not distracted. So that means not distracted our mind. We need our mind distracted, our
verbals are distracted. Our verbals are distracted, maybe physically distracted. Then we're not
able
to settle ourselves. Concentration means particularly is designed teaching on the mind,
or to our mind. Our concentrations have to be settled. Mind is what? Present time is distracted.
All different memories, past memories, present memories, or past memories, present plans,
in future plans, in future projections, so many things, there's so many things are really
completely
distracted. That is not the concentration, it's scattered, scattered mind. But concentration means
one point is single state, mind began to rest. It is own status, whether it is
chamad meditation or vibhayana meditation, not distracted. Chamad meditation means coming down
our own conceptual thoughts to the one single state. One thought rests now.
So that means we're not following the old thoughts,
thinkings, that is concentration. And then vibhayana is zokkin meditation. Seeing the nature of the
mind,
beholding the nature of the openness of the mind or the rukwa, rukwa or the
absolute truth or absolute bodhicata, and relaxing that status freely and openly and very freshly.
That is known as zokkin meditation or relaxing. That is dhyan, dhyan or concentration paramata,
so that essence of it is not distracted. And the next one is, is then pandya paramata.
Pandya paramata is, pandya means wisdom. Wisdom is knowing the exactly way things are,
is wisdom. That means what? Knowing the exactly way things are related truth or relative level,
knowing the exactly way the absolute truth or knowing exactly entity of the related truth
as it is. That means not overstated, not understated, not made anything, just the ways. See,
that means see simple truth as it is. See the truth as it is. That is wisdom.
In Buddhism, that is really the biggest wisdom, the most powerful wisdom, not making up things
as it is. As it is the way on the relative level, as it is on the absolute level as
that and seeing that as it is, that is. And then wisdom can be divided,
teaching that wisdom that comes from the starting, wisdom that comes from the concentrations,
wisdom that comes from the meditation and the practices. All wisdom of the relative truth,
of the wisdom of the absolute truth. But basically seeing as it is, seeing the truth as is a symbol
,
that is the absolute truth. That is the wisdom. Those are the wisdom of the paramata. And the
paramata means what? Again, we added that generosity of the paramata, morality of the paramata,
everything we added paramata. That is generally, paramata makes those generously more special.
Same as generally, again, these six paramata, we all have. It's not just the
unique of the Buddhism. Everyone has, every world has these six. Every world or every religion
explains that. Generosities, moralities, impatience and all that. But paramata
means no grasping, no clinging, no attachment. No attachment, when we are proposing this
performance of the generosity, no attachment. When you're proposing the morality activity,
no attachment, no grasping and patience, joyful effort to the virtues and concentrate,
no attachment, no grasping, no clinging. And some teaching on the teaching said,
no grasping, clinging to the subject, the object, the actions, no clinging. Open, free and very,
very vastness nature, that makes the paramata. And that is paramata in Sanskrit what it truly means
,
one which takes to the other shore, other side of the shore, S-H-O-R-E, I believe, other shore.
That means this paramata with no attachment, no grasping, clinging, will take the other shore
of the enlightenment. This is the samsara shore, where we are now. It's a samsara shore. From this
shore, it will attract to the other shore of the enlightenment, brotherhood or the Nirvana.
Mahaparin, the Nirvana states. So that is known as paramata, sixth paramata. That will maintain
the bodhicitta as well as increase in the bodhicitta. It will bring the progression of the bodhic
itta.
That will bring here, great master, Jayabhji Dune, which is benefiting others.
Benefiting others is benefiting others with the six paramatas. Paramatas, then that is activity
of the conqueror's son and daughter. Here it translates as "upsprings." But conquerors,
symbols, you say, conqueror's son and daughters. That means, in the teachings said, as I said
earlier, in the great master Shanti Devas, the moment we develop the bodhicitta in our heart,
that moment, our name will be changed forever. What is known as bodhisattvas,
bodhisattva of male and bodhisattva of females. Bodhisattva of male and female,
also a name I sometimes say, conqueror is the name of the Buddha. Conqueror. What conquered?
Conquered all the obstacles, obscurations, negative emotions, ego clings, all the knowledge
obscurations, and emotion obscurations. I may be making those other day and you know already.
So, Buddha conquered that, means defeated that. Buddha defeated ego clings, Buddha defeated the
negative emotions, anger, jealous, heavy thoughts, angry, and arrogance, and ignorance, those
defeated,
those really so, Buddha defeated two major obstacles, obscurations. Obscuration of knowledge,
obscurations of the emotions have defeated. Then one who follow in the Buddha's path,
and upholding that lineage is known as noble son and noble daughters. Why they named? Because
this noble son and daughters are generally what in the world, sons of what they say,
sons are keeping the client of the, of the families. This is right. In this case,
the noble son and noble daughters are keeping the client of the Buddhas. What is the client
of the Buddha? It's bodhicata. Bodhicata is a client. You're keeping, upkeeping that client,
or that, that, that cost. Cost. And then what the bodhisattva was doing, also helping to the others
,
that Buddha does. So the Buddha was keeping up the client of the bodhicata, and helping to the
other,
the Buddha loved to all the beings. And now bodhisattva, noble son and noble daughters,
or the prince and the princess of the bodhisattvas, victorious ones, are continually performing,
engaging that activity, and upholding the Buddha's legacy and visions. Therefore,
this conqueror's offspring. They are the holder of the Buddha's client and lineage, teaching,
and his, and the Buddha's vision, in a way. So that is what,
so that is really about bodhicata, okay, bodhicata. And then that is the foundation here,
a quote, I mean she's on the gentleman's head, and I mentioned you all know that. That's really
the foundation of generally all the Buddha teachers. Buddha teaching is generally the best
of love and compassion, and non-violence. That, you know, doesn't matter which school, basic school
,
or the bodhisattva yanas, and everything is the same, that. But then in the bodhisattva yana,
or the Mahayana, highlight it, the kind of more emphasizing on the loving kindness, the compassion,
for all the beings, and for that reason, you're going to get enlightenment, or walking for the
enlightenment. That is emphasized, and that's why it's called Mahayana, big weaker, great weaker.
So that is my brief talk, and thank you very much everyone, okay, thank you, thank you very much
everyone, thank you, thank you. Now again we do short dedication, it's here.
By this merit, may all obtain omniscience, may it defeat any wrong drawing, from the
stormy waves of the birth, or the sickness, and death, from the ocean of the samsara,
may I pray for all beings, may the soul, soul, soul, and the benefit of happiness,
the Buddha's teachings remain for a long time. May the birth to the banner of the lives of the
noble ones, from the whole level of the teachings remain firm. May all the sentient beings always
be joyful, may all births into the lower realms cease forever. May the wishes of all the holy
Sufas and all of whom we swiftly reach for wishes, at this very moment for the peoples and nations
of
the earth, may not even the names of disease, famine, war, and suffering be heard, but rather
make pure conduct, flair, wealth, and prosperity increase, and may supreme good fortune and
well-being always arise. The precious bodhicitta and those without it may be generated, and those
who have it may never diminish, but always continue increasing. May the great tradition of kenpo
shamtara kshita, lopan havasnabha, and the Dharma King Tristan that's increased and spread
throughout
the three realm world. May the appearance of the three jewels and the mind's streams of beings
remain inseparable and embrace the long well-being throughout the three times.
See it in mantra and dharmakaya, how the nature of appearance, sound, and awareness,
the pervasive kaya and the wisdom display of the buddhas, may practitioners of the profoundness
see great perfection remain inseparable from the innermost one taste awareness of wisdom mind.
Thank you again. Thank you very much for participating. If you have time please,
then we do target with the vegakalaya and dharmakala, dharmapala practice. Okay. Thank you.
Otherwise, then hopefully see you at the
after tomorrow. Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much everyone.